README.adoc, before:

= ObjectProtocol
:ext-relative: .adoc
:source-highlighter: coderay
:sectanchors:
:linkattrs:
:toc: left
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

== Goals

. Write message expectation tests with less boilerplate than when using RSpec spies
. Resulting protocols should be usable as documentation
. Be able to specify which object sent the message and which object received it (traditional message expectation test only allow the latter)

== What's An Object Protocol?

Protocols are the types of an OO program. They structure and order the messages passed between communicating agents.

== Using Object Protocols

=== A Simple Logger

Given a unrealistically simple logger:
[source,ruby]
----
class UnrealisticLogger
  def initialize(device)
    @device = device
  end

  def log(message)
    @device << message
  end

  def rotate
    @device.shift
  end
end
----

we can write a protocol for what happens when we call `#log` on an instance of `UnrealisticLogger`

[source.ruby]
----
UnrealisticLoggingProtocol = ObjectProtocol.new(:device, :logger) do # <1>
  logger.sends(:<<).to(device) # <2>
end
----
<1> we need to tell the protocol the names of the participants
<2> we switch to using local variables here instead of the symbols

Then, we can test this protocol:

[source,ruby]
----
require 'object_protocol/rspec'

RSpec.describe UnrealisticLoggingProtocol do
  it "is satisfied by calling #log on the logger" do
    device = []
    logger = UnrealisticLogger.new(device) # <1>

    UnrealisticLoggingProtocol.bind( # <2>
      device: device,
      logger: logger,
    )

    expect(UnrealisticLoggingProtocol).to be_satisfied_by do
      logger.log("message") # <3>
    end
  end
end
----
<1> instantiate the participants
<2> bind participants to the protocol
<3> test an execution against the protocol

Ok, but what was all that?

Well, we created a protocol that we can use as documentation, and tested it with a lot less fanfare and boilerplate than you'd need with traditional message expectation tests!

== Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

[source,ruby]
----
gem 'object_protocol'
----

And then execute:

[source,shell]
----
$ bundle
----

Or install it yourself as:

[source,shell]
----
$ gem install object_protocol
----

== Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to https://rubygems.org[rubygems.org].

== Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/yarmiganosca/object_protocol. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the http://contributor-covenant.org[Contributor Covenant] code of conduct.

== Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the ObjectProtocol project’s codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the https://github.com/yarmiganosca/object_protocol/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md[code of conduct].

Commit message:

instead of recording method_missing, record the passed message name

README.adoc, after:

= ObjectProtocol
:ext-relative: .adoc
:source-highlighter: coderay
:sectanchors:
:linkattrs:
:toc: left
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

== Goals

. Write message expectation tests with less boilerplate than when using RSpec spies
. Resulting protocols should be usable as documentation
. Be able to specify which object sent the message and which object received it (traditional message expectation test only allow the latter)

== What's An Object Protocol?

Protocols are the types of an OO program. They structure and order the messages passed between communicating agents.

== Using Object Protocols

=== A Simple Logger

Given a unrealistically simple logger:
[source,ruby]
----
class UnrealisticLogger
  def initialize(device)
    @device = device
  end

  def log(message)
    @device << message
  end

  def rotate
    @device.shift
  end
end
----

we can write a protocol for what happens when we call `#log` on an instance of `UnrealisticLogger`

[source.ruby]
----
UnrealisticLoggingProtocol = ObjectProtocol.new(:device, :logger) do # <1>
  logger.sends(:<<).to(device) # <2>
end
----
<1> we need to tell the protocol the names of the participants
<2> we switch to using local variables here instead of the symbols

Then, we can test this protocol:

[source,ruby]
----
require 'object_protocol/rspec'

RSpec.describe UnrealisticLoggingProtocol do
  it "is satisfied by calling #log on the logger" do
    device = []
    logger = UnrealisticLogger.new(device) # <1>

    UnrealisticLoggingProtocol.bind( # <2>
      device: device,
      logger: logger,
    )

    expect(UnrealisticLoggingProtocol).to be_satisfied_by do
      logger.log("message") # <3>
    end
  end
end
----
<1> instantiate the participants
<2> bind participants to the protocol
<3> test an execution against the protocol

Ok, but what was all that?

Well, we created a protocol that we can use as documentation, and tested it with a lot less fanfare and boilerplate than you'd need with traditional message expectation tests!

In real life, you'd use an actual object defined in your codebase in place of a fake logger, but you'd probably inject fake or stub collaborator objects to avoid side-effects.

== How Does This All Work, Anyway?

During an execution (the block passed to `satisfied_by`), we spy on every public method (except `#__send__` and `#object_id` because of the warnings) defined on each bound participant object. We record the message, the sender, the receiver, and the arguments (if any) that were passed. Then, we invoke the actual method behavior defined by that object.

=== Interaction with `#method_missing`

`#method_missing` is rarely a message that is sent from one object to another. We currently record the name of the missing method as the "sent message" and record any arguments beyond that message name, as well as the sender and receiver.

== Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

[source,ruby]
----
gem 'object_protocol'
----

And then execute:

[source,shell]
----
$ bundle
----

Or install it yourself as:

[source,shell]
----
$ gem install object_protocol
----

== Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. Then, run `rake spec` to run the tests. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and tags, and push the `.gem` file to https://rubygems.org[rubygems.org].

== Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/yarmiganosca/object_protocol. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors are expected to adhere to the http://contributor-covenant.org[Contributor Covenant] code of conduct.

== Code of Conduct

Everyone interacting in the ObjectProtocol project’s codebases, issue trackers, chat rooms and mailing lists is expected to follow the https://github.com/yarmiganosca/object_protocol/blob/master/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md[code of conduct].
